But I Don't Have a Disability...or Do I?

(In an OKDHS office, Jane is sitting at her desk with sunglasses on, in pain. Her co-worker, Ted, stops at her desk to talk to her.)

Ted: Jane, what's wrong?

Jane: Hey, Ted. I'm starting to feel another migraine coming on.

Ted: Oh, no. I'm really sorry. Is there anything you can do for them?

Jane: I have medication for them, but it takes a little while to kick in. What works best is if I can go to a quiet, dark room for a half hour or so until the medicine starts working. But Margie has noticed me away from my desk outside of break times.

Ted: Have you told her why?

Jane: Yes. She told me if I need to take extra breaks for these headaches that I could take leave time or FMLA. But family leave isn't paid, and I don't want to keep using my leave time. I need that for other things.

Ted: Have you thought about asking for an ADA accommodation?

Jane: ADA? You mean the Americans with Disabilities Act?

Ted: Yeah.

Jane: But, the ADA is for people who have disabilities. I don't have a disability.

Ted: It's true that the ADA provides rights for people with disabilities, like people who have vision or hearing impairments, or people who use wheelchairs, like Ron.

(Cuts to a shot of Ron sitting in his wheelchair at his desk with blocks raising the desk height.)

When he first started working here, he asked for an ADA accommodation to have his desk raised up so he could fit his wheelchair under it. I also asked for an ADA accommodation. 

(Cuts to a shot of Ron's hands typing on an ergonomic keyboard. He wears a wrist brace.)

I have tendonitis in my wrist, so it can get sore when I'm typing and using a mouse all day. I asked for an ergonomic keyboard and mouse, and OKDHS got them for me.

(Cuts back to Jane and Ted talking.)

Jane: But I don't have any of those conditions. How would the ADA apply to me?

Ted: Some disabilities are easy to notice, like needing a wheelchair. But many other conditions are also protected. The ADA defines a "disability" as a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities. This can apply to people who have a condition, had one in the past, or are regarded as having one.

Jane: Working here is a major life activity for me, so I suppose it might qualify?

Ted: Exactly. The law provides protections for qualified employees with disabilities. By qualified, it means the employee satisfies the skills, experience, education, and other job-related requirements of the position they have or are seeking, and can perform the essential job functions of the position, with or without reasonable accommodation. You're qualified to do the functions of your job. And working is a major life activity. If your migraines are interfering with your ability to do your job, you could be covered by the ADA.

Jane: But what does the ADA do exactly?

Ted: It protects people with disabilities from discrimination in employment, in programs and activities offered by state and local governments, and in accessing the goods and services offered in places like stores, hotels, restaurants, movie theaters, doctors' offices - basically public life.

(Cuts to a shot of a city street with stores, hotels, etc. and people walking on the sidewalks.)

Jane: Like providing wheelchair ramps into buildings.

(Cuts back to Ted and Jane talking.)

Ted: Yes, that is one of many examples. The ADA was designed to ensure that people who have disabilities aren't excluded from work or from public life activities that everyone wants to be able to do or enjoy. Before the ADA, a lot of people with disabilities experienced significant restrictions in their lives, and discrimination.

Jane: I'm not sure I feel like I'm being discriminated against.

Ted: Well, maybe not exactly. But the law does require your employer to provide reasonable accommodations to assist you so you can perform your job duties.

Jane: I don't think there's some piece of equipment they can give me that will help me work through these migraines.

Ted: An ADA accommodation doesn't have to be a physical piece of equipment. Depending on the condition, it can be something like making an adjustment to your work schedule, or ensuring you have a quiet space to let your medicine kick in. My cousin Marcus has ADHD.

(Cuts to a shot of Marcus sitting at his desk, confused, while his boss gives him a bunch of verbal instructions.)

Ted: He's a good worker, but doesn't do so well when people give him a bunch of instructions verbally. His supervisor used to start the morning by telling him all the tasks he wanted him to do that day. Just about every day, he would miss something. It was stressing him out and hurting his job performance. 
(Cuts to a shot of Marcus's computer screen with an email from his boss listing his tasks for the day in order of priority.)

He requested an accommodation for his supervisor to put all the tasks in writing and prioritize them so he can keep better track of what he is expected to do. It worked. He's doing great now.

(Cuts back to Jane and Ted talking.)

Jane: (strained, in pain) Thanks, Ted. You've given me a lot to think about. I'll go talk with Margie. After my medicine kicks in.