A Painful Predicament

(In an OKDHS office, Margie, a supervisor, is speaking privately with her employee, Jane.)

Margie: Thank you for coming to talk to me, Jane. I want to first thank you for your excellent work on this week's report. As always, the data was clear and easy to follow. The way you have reorganized the formatting makes it much easier for our directors to quickly find the information they are looking for.

Jane: Thanks, Margie.

Margie: I do need to ask you about a couple of things, though. As you know, you didn't finish the report by the deadline we need it by.

Jane: I know. I am sorry for that.

Margie: This isn't the first time it was late. Or the second. I also have noticed sometimes you are not at your desk for somewhat long amounts of time. We are pretty relaxed about short bathroom and snack breaks. But yesterday, you were away from your desk for 45 minutes. Alan said he found you sitting in the empty office next to his in the dark. He thought you were asleep. Is this the reason why you didn't finish the report on time?

Jane: I'm really sorry, Margie. I can explain. I've started having problems with migraines. I used to get them from time to time, maybe once or twice a year. But lately, they've been happening more frequently. Several times a month. I didn't want to tell you, because I didn't want you to think I wasn't up to doing my job.

Margie: Yes, I have noticed sometimes you look a little strained. And you have had to take several sick days recently.

Jane: Yes. I've been seeing a doctor for this. She gave me some medicine that helps, but it can take a while to kick in. She recommended I go to a dark, quiet room until the medicine takes effect. I figured if I can just do that and get these headaches under control, I can get back to work and get everything done by the end of the day. Stay late to get it done if I need to.

Margie: I'm really sorry to hear you're going through this, and I want to help. I understand you may need some time to deal with these headaches, but we still need those reports turned in on time. And, the agency is very clear about lunch and other break times.

Jane: Is there any wiggle room for me, just for when I have one of these headaches? If I can just have a little time to sit quietly, I usually feel better and can get back and finish my work. An hour, tops.

Margie: I think that would be okay, but you will need to use your paid leave to cover this time.

Jane: Is there any other way? I've already used up a lot of my paid leave for doctor's appointments and sick days. I really need to keep the time I have left in reserve for other things.

Margie: You might look into being approved to have time off per the Family Medical Leave Act. Situations like this are exactly what that law is for.

Jane: I thought about that, but if I use FMLA leave, my paid leave time will be used to cover the time taken until I'm out of paid leave. And then, the FMLA time will be unpaid, and I can't afford to go without pay right now.

Margie: I understand it's not an easy decision, but those are the options you have. If I allow you to take extra break time, your coworkers will notice and feel you're getting special treatment. Plus, we would be violating policy for worked hours.

Jane: I understand. Can I think about it?

Margie: Of course! I appreciate you making me aware of what you're going through. And I understand if you might need to take time off without advanced notice. Let me know if you need my help in applying for FMLA.

Jane: Thanks.