The Interactive Process

(In an OKDHS office, Margie, a supervisor, and Margie's reviewing supervisor Brent are meeting with their employee, Jane.)

Margie: Thanks for meeting with us today, Jane. Brent will be part of our discussion today, as my reviewing supervisor.

Brent: Nice to see you again, Jane, and sorry to hear you've been struggling with these migraines. As you know, the Office for Civil Rights approved that you have a qualifying disability under the ADA. So today, we're going to discuss your reasonable accommodation request and options for ways we can best accommodate your condition. As I understand it, you're mostly able to work without any issue, but on occasion, you experience headaches that cause 
you to either leave work and go home, or call in sick for the day. At other times, they occur while you are at work, but you just need a little time for 
your medicine to kick in and then you can resume work. Is this correct?

Jane: Yes, that's correct.

Brent: And there have been some issues with the migraines preventing you from completing your reports on time. Is this correct?

Jane: Yes. That's been a problem a couple of times. Unfortunately, these migraines don't check my schedule before they strike.

Brent: (laughs) I understand. What are your ideas for how we can best accommodate your condition, while making sure your work is completed?

Jane: For times when I have a report deadline, would it be possible for someone else to do my reports? Maybe Ted or Ron?

Margie: I am not sure we can accommodate that. Ted and Ron have their own reports to complete, and there are aspects of your work that only you are qualified to do.

Jane: Okay. Well, sometimes I have headaches that are just so bad and last so long, I can't work at all. I understand that I need to use leave time for those. However, for ones where I just need a break during the day, I'd really prefer to not have to use leave time.

(Cuts to a shot of Jane sitting in a dark office with her eyes closed.)

Jane: Would it be possible for me to be excused to go to a dark room, so I can avoid light and noise while I wait for my medicine to take effect? Then, once I'm feeling better, I can get back to work. I can stay late to make up the time, or work through breaks the next day?

(Cuts back to Margie's office.)

Brent: I think that is reasonable. Margie, I think we can approve this type of as-needed schedule adjustment, if you agree?

Margie: Yes, we can work with this. I can also ensure you have a dark, quiet space to go to. Is the empty office next to Alan's comfortable for you?

Jane: Yes, that's been fine.

Margie: Okay, we'll designate that as your space for these episodes.

(Cuts to a shot of a sign on a closed office door that reads Occupied Please do not disturb.)

Margie: I will get a sign alerting others that the space is occupied, so you can put it on the door and not be disturbed. There is also a lock on the door you can use to ensure no one enters. It's possible we may need to use that office for someone else in the future. If so, we can figure out a new space you can go to.

(Cuts back to Margie's office.)

Jane: That would be great. The only thing that I wish was better is that I could lie down. That seems to help best with the nausea. I've been lying down on the floor in there, but it's really hard and uncomfortable. Would it be possible to get a cot or mattress of some kind in there?

Margie: I think we can do that. There should be plenty of space to store one in there.

Jane: That would really help. What about missing the deadline? I really try to get back to work as quickly as possible, but as you know, sometimes that's been a struggle.

Brent: Let me speak with the other directors. I know they prefer to have those reports in by the times we have set, but they may be able to allow some delayed time on occasion, if it doesn't occur too often.

Jane: Thank you!

Brent: You're welcome. Anything else?

Jane: Yes, just one more thing.

(Cuts to Jane at her desk wearing sunglasses.)

Jane: Sometimes even when I get my headaches down to a dull roar, I'm still pretty sensitive to noise and light. I tried putting on sunglasses back at my
desk, but it makes it hard to see the monitor. Also, the noise in the office can be a little too much.

(Cuts to Jane sitting in the empty office, working on a computer with the lights turned off.)

Jane: Since that empty office has a computer, would it be possible for me to log in and work from in there, just when I need to?

(Cuts back to Margie's office.)

Margie: I think that would be fine, but I would really like for you to communicate with me when you're having one of these episodes. That way, I know where you are and why, and am not left guessing why you are not at your desk.

Jane: I understand. I'm sorry for not doing so before.

Brent: Okay. It sounds like we have a plan going forward. Margie will arrange for a sign and a cot for the empty office, plus allow you to stay late or work through break times if you need extra time during the day. You will also be able to work in the empty office when needed. You will communicate with Margie about these instances, and use paid leave to take time off when it will be for longer than an hour or so. Is this correct?

Jane: Yes.

Brent: And I will coordinate with the directors to see if we can have some flexibility with the deadlines from time to time. If they don't agree to this, we will need to open this discussion back up and come up with a different solution.

Margie: I will write all of this up and provide everyone with a copy of what we have agreed to. Periodically, we will touch base to make sure these accommodations are working out for everyone.

Jane: That sounds good.

Margie: And Jane, if these accommodations we agreed to aren't helping you, or you feel you need a change, please don't hesitate to talk with me. We can discuss and adapt things as needed.

Jane: Okay, I will. Thank you, both.