FMLA, ADA, IDK?

(Margie, an OKDHS supervisor, is having a video call with Elaine, a member of the Office for Civil Rights.)

Elaine: Thanks for calling, Margie. What can I help you with?

Margie: Elaine, I have an issue I need advice on. One of my employees, Jane, is experiencing migraines, and it's starting to affect her work. She's been turning reports in past their deadlines and has needed to take time off work more than usual, including outside break times. I advised her to use paid leave or FMLA for these episodes, but she prefers not to do this. She's asking if she could have an ADA accommodation. What do you think?

Elaine: I think you did the right thing by calling me. As you know, the Office for Civil Rights handles ADA issues for OKDHS. In fact, we're the first people you need to contact if any issues come up that could possibly be ADA related.

Margie: Would migraines be considered a disability per the ADA?

Elaine: They can be since they are chronic and tend to interfere with a person's ability to work.

Margie: Now I feel a bit bad. I addressed this as a performance issue rather than a medical issue.

Elaine: There's no need to feel bad. Often, ADA issues only become known to supervisors when there is a performance issue, like coming in late, excessive absences, or not producing work to standards. When the supervisor starts investigating why the performance issue is happening, they discover there's a medical or mental health reason behind it. It's your job to make sure your employees are performing up to standards. The ADA wasn't designed to excuse employees from performing to those standards. It was intended to help qualified employees perform to standards when a medical or mental health issue is interfering with their ability to do their job.

Margie: Thanks, Elaine. I really had thought this was clearly an FMLA issue.

Elaine: I understand the confusion. Sometimes there is an overlap between what needs to be handled with FMLA versus what can be accommodated through the ADA. For example, say an employee is in a car wreck and is injured badly enough that he cannot work for a period of time. That is where paid leave, FMLA, or possibly short or long-term disability comes into play. However, if the employee is able and wants to work, this could be an ADA issue. Maybe the employee needs to attend physical therapy after the crash. Often, employees use paid leave or FMLA for these appointments. However, if the employee just needs a slight adjustment to his schedule to be able to attend appointments while continuing to work, we might be able to accommodate him per the ADA. And if he needs modified computer equipment while his injuries heal, or if he has a loss of mobility, we can often provide that.

Margie: I'm still a little confused. How are supervisors to know what is ADA versus what needs to be covered with FMLA or leave time?

Elaine: It can be tricky. The main thing you need to know is that if there's any indication an employee has a medical or mental health issue that might interfere with their work, notify the OCR immediately. Some employers are well aware of the ADA and know what words to use and what to ask for. Others don't. They just know a medical or mental health condition is making it harder for them to do their job. There aren't any buzzwords they have to use to alert you that they're needing an ADA accommodation. Often, the employee doesn't even know what to ask for. So call or email the OCR. We can advise you on what to do. You can also contact the OKDHS FMLA Compliance Officer for any FMLA questions.

Margie: I will do that. Thanks.

Elaine: It's also especially important to be aware of potential ADA issues because we are required by law to expeditiously notify the employee of their rights and the proper forms they need to use to request an ADA accommodation. As soon as an employee requests an accommodation or divulges a medical or mental health condition that might interfere with their work, you need to apprise the employee of their rights to request an ADA accommodation and provide the employee with the ADA request for reasonable accommodation form for them to fill out. You can find this form online. Either send a copy of the form to the employee by email or print it out yourself and give it to them. If the employee chooses to submit the request, they can send it by mail directly to us, but we prefer they return it to you so you can have your leadership sign the form and submit it to us. That way, everyone is aware of the situation, which is important because we are required to process ADA requests expeditiously. And, of course, notify the OCR of the situation as soon as you become aware of it.

Margie: So Jane has a choice as to whether she wants to submit this form and request an ADA accommodation? Don't we already have an obligation for it since she has divulged her information to me?

Elaine: Implementing ADA accommodations is a voluntary process, so she doesn't have to follow through with a request if she decides not to. However, to have an accommodation granted, she must request it and go through the approval process. At this point in her situation, our obligation is that we're required by law to make her aware of her rights and how to make an ADA request. So, as soon as possible, you need to advise Jane of her rights and give her the ADA form to fill out. At that point, it's in her hands.

Margie: Okay, I'll do that first thing.

Elaine: Also, and this is important, as employers, we cannot regard employees as having a disability. If Jane decides not to pursue an accommodation, you cannot regard her as having a disability.

Margie: I understand. Thanks, Elaine.

Elaine: You're welcome. Our door is always open. If you have any questions, please call the OCR.

